# PhyloHessianWrapper

A computational tool for phylogenetic Hessian matrix estimation, enabling divergence time inference under (complex) amino acid substitution models with MCMCtree's approximate likelihood method ([dos Reis et al., 2017](#ref-dosreis_2017)).

## Table of Contents
- [Installation](#Installation)
- [Quick Start](#Quick-start)
- [Arguments](#Arguments)
- [Outputs](#Outputs)
- [More_examples](#More_examples)
- [Literature cited](#Literature-cited)

## Installation
```bash
ruby additional_scripts/check_dependency.rb
```

### Dependencies
Ensure these tools are installed:
- Julia (>=1.6)
- Ruby (≥ 2.7)
- R (≥ 4.0)
- IQ-Tree2 (≥ 2.0) or PhyML (≥ 3.1)

## Quick-start
1. Preparation

Get the species tree from `MCMCTree` or `Codeml`. This can be done by running `MCMCtree` with `usedata = 0` in `mcmctree.ctl` then run `sed !4d out.BV > ref.tre`. This step is important as `phyloHessian` uses R package `Phytools` to get the order of tips which are generally different from that used by PAML.

In the given example, `ref.tre` can be obtained by the following bash command where `example/dating/ori/combined/in.BV` is the `in.BV` file generated by running `Codeml` or `MCMCtree` with the default settings.

```bash
sed '4!d' example/dating/ori/combined/in.BV
```

2. Run the following (with **LG+G model** and compare it with the result of `Codeml`)

Enter the folder `example/` and run `phyloHessianWrapper.rb`.

```bash
cd example/;

ruby ../phyloHessianWrapper.rb \
  -s sim/alignment/combined.fas \
  --reftree ref.tre \
  -m LG+G \
  --outdir LG+G_ph \
  --force \
  --cpu 10
```

3. Check results (optional)

Compare the lnL of the tree calculated by `phylohessian` from `LG+G_ph/inBV/info` and that calculated by IQ-Tree (`LG+G_ph/iqtree/iqtree.log`). They should be identical. Also, confirm that the result is the same as that in `LG+G_ph-ref/`.

4. run MCMCTree

Copy the file `LG+G_ph/inBV/in.BV` to the folder for MCMCTree `dating/LG+G/combined/`. Make sure that `usedata = 2 in.BV 3` is specified in the control file `mcmctree.ctl` (for an example, see `example/dating/LG+G/combined/mcmctree.ctl`). Then run in Bash
```bash
mcmctree mcmctree.ctl
```

Then compare the results with those in the folder `ori/` which uses Codeml to calculate the Hessian. Don't they look very similar?

5. Run MCMCTree with a more complex model say **LG+C60+G+I**.


## Arguments
**Required arguments**
*   `-s <value>`: Sequence alignment file in Fasta format.
    *   Options: Path to a Fasta file.
    *   Default: None.

*   `-t|--tree <value>`: An unrooted treefile.
    *   Options: Path to a treefile.
    *   Default: None.

*   `-m|--model <value>`: An unrooted treefile.
    *   Options: Substitution model.
    *   Default: None.

*   `--outdir <value>`: Output folder.
    *   Options: Path to a directory.
    *   Default: None.

*  `-r|--reftree|--ref_tree|--ref_tre|--reftree <value>`: reference tree output from `MCMCtree`. This ensures the order of the gradient and Hessian are compatible with `MCMCtree`.
   *    Options: can be generated by `sed '4!d' in.BV` (see the example above).
   *    Defauly: None.
    
**Optional arguments**
*   `--cpu <value>`: Number of threads to use.
    *   Default: 1

*   `--phylo_prog <value>`: Program used for phylogenetic reconstruction (estimation of branch lengths, topology is fixed for `MCMCtree`).
    *   Options:  `iqtree` or `phyml`.
    *   Default: `iqtree`

*   `--pmsf`: Perform a PMSF approximation (only valid for mixture models).
    *   Options: Can also be specified by `-m LG+C10+PMSF`. See [Wang et al., 2018](#ref-Wang_2018) for details.
    *   Default: None

*   `--force`: Remove the `outdir` if it exists.
    *   Options: (Flag - presence enables the functionality).  Presence of the flag triggers the removal.
    *   Default: The `outdir` is not removed.

*   `--no_mwopt`: Disable optimization of mixture weights (not recommended).
    *   Options: By default, `--mwopt` is enabled in `IQ-Tree`.
    *   Default: Mixture weight optimization is enabled.


## Outputs
- `julia/`  some information of the tree structure
- `iqtree/` or `phyml`  output of tree reconstruction
- `bl/`  some information about the branch lengths
- `ph/inBV/`  the folder containing the most important outputs
  - `info`  the lnL of the tree evaluated at the MLEs (maximum-likelihood estimates) of all parameters
  - `in.BV`  the file that contains the MLEs of branch lengths, gradients, and Hessian.
- `execution_{TIME}.log`  the log file
 
## How to complete molecular dating using MCMCtree
1. Copy the file into your working directory  
   Command: `cp ph/inBV/in.BV .`
2. Edit the control file  
   File: `mcmctree.ctl`
   Set: `usedata = 3 in.BV`
3. Run the analysis  
   Command: `mcmctree mcmctree.ctl`

Notes:  
- Step 1 assumes your current directory is where you want to run mcmctree. Adjust paths if needed.  
- Preserve spacing in the control file to match mcmctree’s expected format.
- See also Tutorial 2 in [dos Reis, et al. 2017](#ref-dosreis_2017)


## More_examples

- LG+C60+G under PMSF [Wang et al., 2018](#ref-Wang_2018)
```bash
ruby ../phyloHessianWrapper.rb -s sim/alignment/combined.fas --reftree ref.tre -m LG+C60+G+PMSF --outdir outdir --force --cpu 10
```

- LG+C60+G without `--mwopt` (use the default weights for each mixtures)
```bash
ruby ../phyloHessianWrapper.rb -s sim/alignment/combined.fas --reftree ref.tre -m LG+C60+G --outdir outdir --force --cpu 10 --no_mwopt
```

- EX2+G with `PhyML` (need to have `phyml-mixSS` installed)
```bash
ruby ../phyloHessianWrapper.rb -s sim/alignment/combined.fas --reftree ref.tre -m EX2+G --outdir outdir --force --cpu 10 --phylo_prog phyml
```


## Literature-cited
**You might want to cite the following in case you use `phyloHessian`** in case they are involved in your analysis.
-  <a id="ref-Wang_Meade_2025"></a>Wang S, Meade A. Molecular Clock Dating of Deep-Time Evolution Using Complex Mixture Models. https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.07.17.665246v1. bioRxiv. 2025:2025-07.

**And tools (potentially) involved**
-  Minh BQ, Schmidt HA, Chernomor O, Schrempf D, Woodhams MD, Von Haeseler A, Lanfear R. IQ-TREE 2: new models and efficient methods for phylogenetic inference in the genomic era. Molecular biology and evolution. 2020 May 1;37(5):1530-4.
-  Revell LJ. phytools 2.0: an updated R ecosystem for phylogenetic comparative methods (and other things). PeerJ. 2024 Jan 5;12:e16505.

**Others**
-  <a id="ref-Wang_2018"></a>Wang HC, Minh BQ, Susko E, Roger AJ. Modeling site heterogeneity with posterior mean site frequency profiles accelerates accurate phylogenomic estimation. Systematic biology. 2018 Mar 1;67(2):216-35.
-  <a id="ref-dosreis_2017"></a>dos Reis M, Álvarez-Carretero S, Yang Z. MCMCTree tutorials. https://gensoft.pasteur.fr/docs/paml/4.9j/MCMCtree.Tutorials.pdf. 2017 Apr 28


